EXP(1)                           User Commands                          EXP(1)



NAME
       exp - Embedthis Expansive -- Fast, Powerful Web Site Generator

SYNOPSIS
       exp
           --chdir directory
           --keep
           --listen IP:PORT
           --log path:level
           --noclean
           --norender
           --nowatch
           --quiet
           --trace path:level
           --verbose dir
           --version
           commands ...


       Commands:
           clean
           init
           install
           render
           filters ...
           upgrade
           uninstall
           watch
           <CR>

DESCRIPTION
       Expansive is a fast and powerful web site generator using Ejscript.  It
       quickly creates HTML pages from layouts, partials and content pages.



WHY EXPANSIVE?
       There are many web site site generators,  why  another  one?   Existing
       site generators are often slow, very slow, painfully slow.  When creat-
       ing or managing a web site, you need tools that do not delay  the  cre-
       ative design process. They need to be as fast as possible. Expansive is
       fast, pure and simple.

       Other site generators frequently provide poor  diagnostics.  Fine  when
       everything  works,  but  when a page fails to render due to a scripting
       error -- debugging can be a nightmare. Expansive  shows  exactly  where
       errors occur.


FEATURES
       Expansive  is  implemented  primarily  as  a single script of some 1.5K
       lines of Ejscript and is very hackable.  It  has  the  following  major
       features:

           .  Generate  static  web  sites  from  pages, layouts, partials and
       scripts
           . Ejscript templates for dynamic content
           . Layout pages to define the look and feel of site
           . Partial pages to include replicated content
           . Per-page meta data to control layouts and partials
           . Integrated web server to serve content
           . Watches for changes and automatically render site
           . Scripting support via change events
           . Automatic sitemap creation
           . Content transition pipeline
           . Open plugin architecture


NICE PARTS
       While Expansive has a strong feature set, there are  some  characteris-
       tics that make Expansive particularly sweet.

           . Fast, fast, fast
           . Full power of Ejscript in every page
           .  Very simple code. By leveraging Ejscript, the code is simple and
       clean
           . Easy to create and install new plugins
           . Great diagnostics when things go wrong



BASIC USAGE
       To prepare a directory for expansive and create an expansive.es config-
       uration file:
           exp init

       To  install  new  plugins  to  transform content. The exp-less compiles
       *.less into css.
           exp install exp-less

       To render a site from 'documents' into 'public'
           exp render

       To serve content and watch for changes
           exp

       To watch for changes but not serve
           exp watch

       To render a matching set of documents
           exp documents/index.html
           exp documents/manual

       To clean the rendered site under 'public'
           exp clean



DIRECTORIES
       Expansive uses the following directories:

           documents   Input web pages to be processed
           files       Files to be copied and not processed
           layouts     For master page layouts
           public      Final output directory containing the rendered web site
           partials     For  partial  web  pages that can be included by other
       pages

       These directories can be modified via meta 'expansive.directories' col-
       lection.


PROCESSING
       Expansive  operates by processing web pages from the 'documents' direc-
       tory. It uses layout pages from the 'layouts'  directory  and  includes
       partial  pages  from  the 'partials' directory. Raw files may be copied
       from the 'files' directory.  Content is rendered to the 'public' output
       directory.


CONFIGURATION
       Expansive  is  controlled by an 'expansive.es' configuration file. This
       defines top level configuration for the site and controls how Expansive
       renders the site. An expansive.es file must be present for Expansive to
       render content.

       To prepare a new site to use Expansive, run:

           exp init


       This creates an expansive.es file. Here is a cut-down portion:

            Expansive.load({
                meta: {
                    title: 'Home page title',
                    url: 'Home page url',
                    description: 'Meta data description (optional)',
                    keywords: 'Meta data keywords (optional)',
                },
                expansive: {
                    copy: [ '**.tags', 'images' ],
                    dependencies: { 'css/all.css.less': 'css/*.inc.less' },
                    documents: [ '**', '!css/*.inc.less' ],
                    plugins: [ 'less', 'css', 'analytics', 'gzip' ],
                    script: `
                        function menu(item) meta.menu == item ? 'active' : ''
                    `
                },
                services: {
                    /* Configuration for plugins */
                }
             })

       The 'meta' contents of the expansive.es file are added to the Expansive
       meta data collection that is provided to every page, layout and partial
       page. The 'expansive' collection has properties that control the opera-
       tion of Expansive. These values are made available to web pages via the
       'meta.expansive' property.


       In the expansive section, the 'documents' array defines the set of pat-
       terns  to  select documents for processing.  The 'copy' array defines a
       set of patterns to select files to copy without  processing.  The  copy
       patterns are relative to the 'documents' directory. The 'script' string
       defines an optional global script to inject code into the Ejscript exe-
       cution  context.  The  'sitemap'  collection  defines what documents to
       include in the created sitemap XML file.


DYNAMIC CONTENT
       Expansive uses embedded  Javascript  in  web  pages  to  fully  support
       dynamic content.  Scripts can be embedded via the special Expansive tag
       '<@ ...  @>'. This will run the script when the page  is  rendered  and
       replace  the  script  with  rendered  data.   When the script runs, the
       'this' object is set to the  'expansive'  object  for  easy  access  to
       Expansive methods. See SCRIPTING below for more details.

       For example, to render the current date in a document:

        <p>Today is <@ write(Date()) @>

       The write function is used to render data to be used in place of the <@
       @> element.  You can use 'writeSafe' to HTML  escape  the  data  before
       writing.  You can also use a simpler form <@= that means use the result
       of the Javascript expression, HTML escapse the data and then write  it.
       For example:

        <p>Today is <@= Date() @>

       Even  simpler,  you can use an abbreviated @@variable to emit the value
       of a Javascript variable. For example:

        <p>Site URL is @@{meta.url}</p>

       The top URL of the site may be abbreviated as '@~'.


TRANSFORMATIONS
       Expansive will interpret document extensions and  automatically  trans-
       form  content  from  one  format to another.  For example, the filename
       'instructions.html.md' tells Expansive that the  data  is  in  Markdown
       format  via  the  '.md' extension and it should be converted to 'html'.
       Expansive will examine each nested extension and process  the  document
       until it reaches an extension for which there is no further transforma-
       tions defined.

       Expansive uses the '.exp' extension to specify the document has  embed-
       ded Ejscript. For example:

            index.html.md.exp

       This  means the file has Embedded Ejscript in a Markdown file that will
       be compiled to HTML. Expansive will process this by first  running  the
       embedded  Ejscript,  then piping the result through the Markdown filter
       and finally saving the result as 'index.html' after applying the appro-
       priate layout.


PLUGINS
       Expansive  may be extended via plugins that provide transformations and
       additional scripting capability. A site specifies the  plugins  to  use
       via  the  'expansive.plugins'  property. When a plugin is installed via
       'exp install', the plugin automatically to the ordered 'plugins'  list.
       When  a  plugin  is loaded, it registers itself to handle specific file
       extension transformations. The  transformation  pipeline  for  specific
       extensions can be overridden via the


USEFUL PLUGINS
       Here are some of the more useful Expansive plugins:

       exp-bash  Run shell scripts and capture the output

       exp-css   Process  CSS files to add browser specific prefixs and minify
                 the  output.  Requires  'autoprefixer'  and  'recess'  to  be
                 installed.

       exp-esp   Compile ESP web pages and applications.

       exp-gzip  Compress  final  output using gzip. Files are rendered with a
                 'gz' extension.

       exp-js    Process Javascript  files  to  mangle  and  minify.  Requires
                 'uglify' to be installed.

       exp-less  Process  Less  stylesheets  into CSS. Requires 'recess' to be
                 installed.

       exp-marked
                 Install the Markdown program. Use with the exp-md plugin  for
                 Markdown files.

       exp-md    Process Markdown files and emit html.

       exp-recess
                 Install  the recess program. Use with the exp-less plugin for
                 Less file processing, and the exp-css file for minifying  CSS
                 files.

       exp-sass  Process SASS files into CSS. Requires "sass" to be installed.

       exp-uglifyjs
                 Install Uglify-js. Use with the exp-js plugin to  mangle  and
                 minify Javascripts.

       Many  plugins  can be customized by passing configuration to the plugin
       via expansive.es file. For example:  To  request  that  all  Javascript
       files be minified, use a '.min.js' extension, and be compressed but not
       managed:

       {
           services: {
               'minify-js': {
                   compress: true,
                   mangle: true,
                   dotmin: true,
               }
           }
        }

        See specific plugin documentation for the  configuration  options  for
       each plugin.


LAYOUTS
       A  layout  page  defines the top level HTML content for a set of pages.
       The layout defines the format, look and feel of the web  site  so  that
       each  pages  does  not need to replicate this content. Despite the fact
       that pages nominate a layout page to use, it is  actually  layout  page
       that  includes  the  content page inside it to create a composite page.
       The '<@ content @>' tag in the layout is replaced with the  actual  web
       page data after separating the page meta data.

       There  can  be  multiple  layout pages and the default layout is called
       'default.html.exp'. Layout pages may next, i.e. may  use  other  layout
       pages.  Layout pages can use any desired transformation file extension.

             <!DOCTYPE html>
             <html lang="en">
             <head>
                 <title><@= meta.title @></title>
                 <link href="css/api.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
             </head>
             <body>
                 <div class="content">
                     <@ content @>
                 </div>
             </body>
             </html>



PARTIALS
       Web pages often need to have content that is common  across  a  set  of
       pages.  Expansive  supports this via partial pages that can be included
       by any page, layout or other partial page. A page specifies  a  partial
       by using the 'partial' Javascript function. For example:

        <@ partial('header') @>

       The partial function will search for a file starting with 'header.html'
       in the 'partials' directory.  Partials  are  transformed  according  to
       their  extension.  If  a partial called 'header.html.md.exp' was found,
       then it will be first transformed by  running  the  embedded  Ejscript,
       then  piping the output into the Markdown to create html data that will
       then be included in place of the original partial tag.


       Partials can be nested, in that a partial page may include another par-
       ital page to any depth.


META DATA
       Pages, layouts and partials can define meta data at the top of the file
       via a Javascript literal.  Meta data is passed to the  Ejscript  execu-
       tion  context for each page, layout and partial where scripts can exam-
       ine and use in rendering pages.

             {
                draft: true,
                navigation: 'blog',
             }
             <h1>Page Header</h1>

       The meta data is added to the current meta  data  collection  from  the
       expansive.es  file  and  passed  to the layout page, partials pages and
       content pages. The meta data can be  accessed  via  the  global  'meta'
       Javascript variable.


       Meta data is inherited and aggregated as Expansive processes a web site
       directory. In each directory, a site may define an 'expansive.es'  file
       that  provides  additional meta data for that directory level. The meta
       data from upper directories is passed down  to  lower  directories.  In
       this  manner  upper levels can define the parameters for subdirectories
       in the site. Meta data is never passed back up the tree.


META PROPERTIES
       Expansive defines a rich set of meta properties for you to use in  your
       pages:

       basename    Basename portion of the public document filename.

       date        Generation date of the document.

       document    Name  of  the  document  in  'documents' that is being pro-
                   cessed.

       extension   The extension of the public document filename.

       extensions  The set of extensions on the original input document.

       file        Filename of the document or partial being processed.

       from        The filename  extension  being  processed  by  the  current
                   transformation.

       isLayout    True if a layout is being processed.

       isPartial   True if a partial page is being processed.

       layout      Layout page in use. Set to '' if no layout being used.

       mode        Index  in the modes property. The selected property collec-
                   tion is copied up to the top level of the meta data.

       partial     Name of the partial page being processed.

       path        Input filename of the document.

       public      Final public filename for the document.

       service     Name of the transformation service being run.

       to          The destination filename extension after processing by  the
                   current transformation.

       top         URL for the top level home page of the site.

       url         URL for the current page.


EXPANSIVE CONTROL
       Expansive  defines  a  set  of control properites in the meta.expansive
       property. These are originally sourced from the

       copy        Array of patterns to copy without processing. The  patterns
                   may  include  "*"  or "**". If a directory is specifed, all
                   files under the directory are copied. The files  are  rela-
                   tive to the documents directory.

       dependencies
                   Hash  of file dependency relationships. The hash key is the
                   document path and the value is a set of files that if modi-
                   fied,  cause  the document to be rendered. The document and
                   files are relative to the documents directory. The  set  of
                   files can be a string or an array of files. Each value file
                   may contain "*" or "**".

       directories Directories collection. Entries for  'documents',  'files',
                   'public', 'layouts', and 'partials'.

       documents   Array  of patterns to process. The patterns may include "*"
                   or "**". If a directory is specifed, all  files  under  the
                   directory are processed. The files are relative to the doc-
                   uments directory.

       listen      Address on which to listen for HTTP requests. May be just a
                   port number.

       plugins     List of plugins to use.

       script      Script  to  evaluate  to  inject  code  into  the Expansive
                   Ejscript global execution context.

       sitemap     Control what files to include in  a  sitemap.  If  defined,
                   Expansive  will  by  default  include all HTML files in the
                   sitemap.  To change the file set included in  the  sitemap,
                   define  a 'files' property with an array of patterns in the
                   sitemap object.

                   sitemap: {
                      files: [ '**.html', '!draft.html' ],
                   }

       transforms  Hash of extension mappings to a list of transform  services
                   for  those mappings. Mappings are in the form 'ext -> ext'.
                   For example:

                    transforms: {
                       'less -> css': [ 'compile-less', 'prefix-css', 'minify-
                   css', 'compress' ]
                    }

                   Some  of  the standard service names are: compile-esp, com-
                   pile-less,   compile-markdown,   compile-sass,    compress,
                   minify-css, minify-js, prefix-css, shell.


       watch       Time  in  milliseconds to wait between checking for render-
                   ing.


CREATING PLUGINS
       Expansive   plugins    are    created    using    the    Pak    utility
       (https://embedthis.com/pak)   and  published  to  the  Pak  Catalog  at
       (https://embedthis.com/catalog/). The plugin contains  an  expansive.es
       file that includes transforms relevant to the plugin.  For example:

        {
           expansive: {
               transforms: {
                   name:       'my-transform',
                   input:      'ext1',
                   output:         'ext2',
                   script:     '
                       function transform(contents, meta, service) {
                           return transformed data
                       }
                   '
               }
           }
        }


       The plugin specifies a one or more transformations via the 'transforms'
       collection. Each transform definition provides  an  implemention  of  a
       transform  service. The 'name' property specifies the transform service
       name. The service name provides an abstract  name  for  which  multiple
       plugins may provide the implementation. The service is selected via the
       'plugins' property and Expansive chooses the first plugin  that  adver-
       tized that service.

       The  'input'  property  specifies  the input filename extension and the
       'output' property specifies the output extension.   If  all  extensions
       are  supported,  set the value to '*'. Both 'input' and 'output' may be
       arrays if multiple extensions are supported.

       The transform script should define a global 'transform'  function  that
       will  be  invoked  for  matching content.  It is invoked with the 'con-
       tents' to transform (String), the meta data collection and the  service
       object  that  contains service options.  The function should return the
       transformed data.

       A plugin may also define other  Ejscript  functions  and  variables  in
       'script'  that will be injected into the global scope of Expansive when
       it executes.


SCRIPTING
       Expansive defines a top level global named "expansive" to access Expan-
       sive services. This object provides the following methods:


       addItems(collection, items)
              Add  items  to  a  named  collection.  Collections  are globally
              defined and reset at the start of processing for each  document.
              Documents,  partials  and  layouts can inject items into collec-
              tions for sharing to other documents. Items may be a  string  or
              an array of strings. Items are uniquely added to the collection.

       getFiles({key: value})
              To return a list of  matching  documents  that  have  meta  data
              matching the specified keys and values.

       getFileMeta(filename)
              To return the meta data specified in the given file.

       getItems(collection)
              Return the items in a named collection as an Array.

       removeItems(collection, items)
              Remove the specified items from the named collection.

       renderScripts
              Render  all  scripts  added  to  the  'scripts'  collection  via
              'addItems'. This permits  documents,  partials  and  layouts  to
              require Javascripts and have them emitted uniquely by a partial.

       renderStyles
              Render all stylesheets added to the 'styles' and 'inline-styles'
              collections via 'addItems'. This permits documents, partials and
              layouts to require stylesheets and have them emitted uniquely by
              a partial.

       trace(tag, msg...)
              To emit console trace while processing.


COMMANDS
       clean  Remove rendered content from the 'public' output directory.

       init   Initialize  a directory by creating an 'expansive.es' configura-
              tion file.

       install
              Install a plugin from the Pak catalog.

       render Render the site by processing files from 'documents', 'layouts',
              'partials' and 'files' into the 'public' output directory.

       uninstall
              Uninstall a plugin from the expansive.es plugin list. The plugin
              remains in the local Pak cache.

       upgrade
              Upgrade a plugin version in the local Pak cache.

       watch  Watch for changes to 'documents', 'layouts' and  'partials'  and
              render  the  modified  files. Changes to 'layouts' or 'partials'
              will cause the entire site to be rendered.

       <CR>   Running exp without any arguments will cause  run  the  embedded
              web  server  to serve the site. By default Expansive will listen
              on port 4000. This can be modified via the 'listen' property  in
              the meta collection.

       patterns ...
              Providing  a  list of patterns to filter the set of documents to
              render.  Expansive will render only  the  documents  that  begin
              with the given patterns.



OPTIONS
       --chdir directory
                 Change to directory before running.


       --keep URI
                 Keep intermediate files when transforming content. Useful for
                 debugging.


       --listen IP:PORT URI
                 Change the port on which Expansive will listen. Can omit  the
                 IP portion and only specify a port.


       --log filename:level
                 Emit  trace  to  the specified file. The level is a verbosity
                 level from 0-5 with 5 being the most verbose.


       --noclean Do not clean the  'public'  directory  before  rendering.  By
                 default  Expansive will remove all the content under 'public'
                 first.


       --norender
                 Do not do an initial render before watching for changes.


       --nowatch Do not watch for changes when serving content.


       --quiet   Run in quiet mode. Do not emit activity trace to the console.


       --trace filename:level
                 Trace  HTTP  requests  to  the specified file. The level is a
                 verbosity level from 0-5 with 5 being the most verbose.  HTTP
                 requests and HTTP headers will be traced at levels 2-4.


       --verbose Run in verbose mode. Emit more activity trace.


       --versions URI
                 Show exp version information.


       --DIGIT   Emit log and HTTP trace to stderr at the specified level. The
                 DIGIT must be 0 to 5 with 5 being  the  most  verbose.   This
                 option   is   the   same   as   "--log  stderr:DIGIT  --trace
                 stderr:DIGIT"



REPORTING BUGS
       Report bugs to dev@embedthis.com.

COPYRIGHT
       Copyright (C) 2004-2014 Embedthis Software.  Bit  and  Ejscript  are  a
       trademarks of Embedthis Software.

SEE ALSO
       ejs, me, http://embedthis.com/exp/



exp                               March 2014                            EXP(1)
